@node Desktop Enviornment
@chapter Desktop Environment

A Linux distribution usually has two types of interfaces.
One of them is virtual console (CLI) and the other is GUI.
Virtual console is the default interface from Linux kernel and does not support Unicode.
For example, in Debian/Ubuntu, type @code{<ctrl>+<alt>+F@{1-6@}} can change between virtual console and GUI.
Specifically, @code{<ctrl>+<alt>+F2} can change to the GUI, and @code{<ctrl>+<alt>+F@{3,4,5,6@}} are different virtual consoles.
Desktop environment is a collection of GUI programs that replaces CLI and is one of the most complicated subsystem in Linux.
It breaks up the limitation of shell and provides a more flexiable interface for users.
By default, the startup program, i.e., systemd, will initialize the GUI desktop.
The desktop also can be opened manually. 
For example, @code{sudo startx} is the command to start an x11 service.
x11 and Wayland are two communication protocol that relates a display server and the client.
Most of the desktop and libraries are based on them.

Graphicless compares the follow open-source desktop environments.

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .25 .25 .25
@headitem              @tab        KDE         @tab       GNOME       @tab         xfce
@item      Toolkit     @tab         QT         @tab        GTK        @tab         GTK
@item  Display manager @tab        SDDM        @tab        gdm        @tab       LightDM
@item  Session manager @tab      ksmserver     @tab   gnome-session   @tab    xfce4-session
@item  Windows manager @tab        KWin        @tab    gnome-shell    @tab        xfwm4
@item  Desktop manager @tab          -         @tab         -         @tab      xfdesktop
@item   File manager   @tab       Dolphin      @tab     Nautilus      @tab        Thunar
@item     Launcher     @tab       Kickoff      @tab         -         @tab      xfce-panel
@item      Editor      @tab        Kate        @tab gnome-text-editor @tab       Mousepad
@item     Terminal     @tab       Konsole      @tab   gnome-terminal  @tab    xfce4-terminal
@item      Network     @tab   Network Manager  @tab  Network Manager  @tab          -
@item     Capturer     @tab      Spectacle     @tab  GNOME Screenshot @tab xfce4-screenshooter
@item  Document viewer @tab       Okular       @tab       Evince      @tab          -
@item   Image viewer   @tab      Gwenview      @tab       Loupe       @tab      Ristretto
@item   Input method   @tab          -         @tab         -         @tab          -
@item Advanced setting @tab          -         @tab    gnome-tweaks   @tab          -
@item    Development   @tab      KDevelop      @tab   GNOME Builder   @tab          -
@end multitable

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .4 .4
@headitem                   @tab    LXQT      @tab         DDE
@item      Toolkit          @tab      QT      @tab          QT
@item  Display manager      @tab     SDDM     @tab       LightDM
@item  Session manager      @tab lxqt-session @tab     dde-session
@item  Windows manager      @tab    Openbox   @tab     Treeland
@item  Desktop manager      @tab       -      @tab          -
@item   File manager        @tab  PcManFm-qt  @tab   dde-file-manager
@item     Launcher          @tab  lxqt-runner @tab     dde-launcher
@item      Editor           @tab       -      @tab    deepin-editor
@item     Terminal          @tab   QTerminal  @tab   deepin-terminal
@item      Network          @tab       -      @tab          -
@item     Capturer          @tab  Screengrab  @tab  deepin-screenshot
@item  Document viewer      @tab       -      @tab    deepin-reader
@item   Image viewer        @tab  Lximage-qt  @tab deepin-image-viewer
@item   Input method        @tab       -      @tab      deepin-im 
@item Advanced setting      @tab       -      @tab     deepin-tweak
@item    Development        @tab       -      @tab      Deepin-IDE
@end multitable

@section GNOME

@subsection Advanced Setting

gnome-tweaks gives advanced settings for gnome.
It support swap of Caplock and Ctrl.
Download it in Debian with

@code{sudo apt install gnome-tweaks}

This swap is only useful in gnome-based GUI.
Windows has a similar tool that named as [PowerToys](https://github.com/microsoft/PowerToys).

@section xfce4

Graphicless tests xfce4 in Debian 12.
It uses xfce4-terminal and firefox as the default applications for terminal and web browser, respectively.

@section Window Manager

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .2 .2 .2
@headitem @tab Openbox @tab i3 @tab xmonad @tab sway
@item Protocol @tab x11 @tab x11 @tab Wayland @tab Wayland
@end multitable

@subsection Openbox

Install Openbox with apt

@code{sudo apt install openbox}

By default, openbox has a refresh issue in Ubuntu.
The applications will not automatic refresh after opening them.
To fix this, change the configuration file

@code{sudo vim /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/openbox-autostart}

Uncommand the line 
@code{test -z $BG || $BG -solid "#303030"}

