@node Network
@chapter Network

@section iw

iw is a configuration tool for mac80211 in Linux kernel with netlink
The code tree of @code{iw.c} in iw is

@itemize @bullet
@item main
    @itemize @minus
    @item version
    @item nl80211_init
        @itemize @minus 
        @item nl_socket_alloc
        @item nl_socket_free
        @item nl_socket_set_buffer_size
        @end itemize
    @item usage
        @itemize @minus 
        @item __usage_cmd
        @item usage_options
        @end itemize
    @item __handle_cmd
        @itemize @minus 
        @item error_handler
        @item finish_handler
        @item ack_handler
        @item register_handler
        @item valid_handler
        @item phy_lookup
        @end itemize
    @item phy_lookup
    @item nl80211_cleanup
    @end itemize
@item TOPLEVEL
    @itemize @minus 
    @item print_help
    @end itemize
@item handle_cmd
    @itemize @minus 
    @item __handle_cmd
    @end itemize
@item usage_cmd
    @itemize @minus 
    @item __usage_cmd
    @end itemize
@end itemize

@section Clash

clash is a tunnel in Go.

@subsection Installation

openSUSE contains clash in its repository, so it can be downloaded directly

@code{sudo zypper in clash}

Debian repository does not contain clash, so it can be downloaded from [Github release](https://github.com/Dreamacro/clash/releases).
It also can be downloaded in command.
As an example

@code{wget https://github.com/Dreamacro/clash/releases/download/v1.18.0/clash-linux-amd64-v1.18.0.gz}
@code{mv clash-linux-amd64-v1.18.0.gz clash}

@subsection Basic Usage

If clash is run in the user space, copy the @code{config.yaml} file to @code{~/.config/clash/} directory and run

@code{clash}

Clash will download the @code{Country.mmdb} file by itselef and load the configuration in @code{~/.config/clash/}.

@subsection Autostart

Clash support auto-start after opening the system.
In openSUSE, the download version of clash has a systemd service with @code{/lib/system/system/clash.service} to support the auto-start process.
This service is based on systemd, so it works for openSUSE and other distributions that uses systemd as the init process.
Different from manually run clash, the systemd will load the configuration in the directory @code{/etc/clash/} by default.
So move the configuration file and mmdb file in the above directory by

@code{sudo mv /path/to/config/file /etc/clash/}
@code{sudo mv /path/to/Country.mmdb /etc/clash}

Then, enable and start clash service

@code{systemclt enable clash}
@code{systemclt start clash}

The final process is to config the system-level network setting or program-level network setting to use the clash service.

@section Clash for LAN
 
Clash can support connection from devices in the local area network (LAN).
To enable it, just edit the config.yaml file and set the @code{allow-lan} to @code{true}.
Then open clash with manual

@code{clash -d ~/.config/clash/}

@section snapdrop.net

@url{https://snapdrop.net, snapdrop} is an easily-used point-to-point file transfer in the web browser.
Open the link of snapdrop in the same network.
The website can identify all devices in the same network. 
Just drop the file to the target.
